README.md, before:

# Smart energy monitor data logging
This script reads the data from a connected Origin Energy branded smart meter
monitor and publishes the data to [ThingsBoard](https://thingsboard.io/).

Written by Jotham Gates, May 2025.

## Notes on the energy monitor
The energy monitor's model name is "SM-EM-FMAG-P" and it connects to a smart
meter using Zigbee. These monitors were distributed as freebies in Victoria,
Australia many years ago. As fair as I know, these particular devices are no
longer produced or distributed.

When connected to a computer using USB (vendor id `2047`, product id `08a4`),
the monitor appears as two drives, each with one partition:
  - `Upgrade EM` is for use when updating the firmware.
  - `Origin EM` contains a HTML page showing data in half hour chunks. The
    data we are interested in is obtained from JavaScript files in this page.

Further information may be gained from these sources:
- [Whirlpool thread on the devices](https://forums.whirlpool.net.au/archive/2165708)
- [FCCID page showing photos and other documents for the device](https://fccid.io/2AALMPVU-G2NA)
    - At one point, the monitor's model was "PVU-G2NA PowerVu".
- [User manual](https://www.manualslib.com/manual/713959/Origin-Energy-Monitor.html)


## Installation and setup
1. Clone this repository to the computer that the monitor will be connected to.
2. Create a python virtual environment and activate it.
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    ```
3. Install the required libraries
    ```bash
    pip3 install -r requirements.txt
    ```
4. Log into your ThingsBoard server and create a new device. Note down the MQTT
    access token for it.
5. Make a copy of [`settings.example.py`](./settings.example.py) and name it 
    `settings.py`. Fill in the required constants for file paths, UUIDs, address
    of your ThingsBoard server and access token.
6. Check that everything is working correctly by manually running
    [`read_data.py`](./read_data.py).
    ```bash
    ./read_data.py
    ```
7. Set up a cron job to regularly run the script to fetch new data from the
    energy monitor and publish it. This can be accomplished using `crontab -e`.  
    The following example acquires and uploaded fresh data at 3 minutes past the
    half hour to allow for some discrepancy between the energy monitor's clock
    and the computer's.
    ```cron
    3-59/30 * * * * cd <FOLDER_OF_THIS_SCRIPT> && ./.venv/bin/python3 read_data.py
    ```

Commit message:

Added the option to remove power from the USB port when the script is not running.

README.md, after:

# Smart energy monitor data logging
This script reads the data from a connected Origin Energy branded smart meter
monitor and publishes the data to [ThingsBoard](https://thingsboard.io/).

Written by Jotham Gates, May 2025.

## Notes on the energy monitor
The energy monitor's model name is "SM-EM-FMAG-P" and it connects to a smart
meter using Zigbee. These monitors were distributed as freebies in Victoria,
Australia many years ago. As fair as I know, these particular devices are no
longer produced or distributed.

When connected to a computer using USB (vendor id `2047`, product id `08a4`),
the monitor appears as two drives, each with one partition:
  - `Upgrade EM` is for use when updating the firmware.
  - `Origin EM` contains a HTML page showing data in half hour chunks. The
    data we are interested in is obtained from JavaScript files in this page.

Further information may be gained from these sources:
- [Whirlpool thread on the devices](https://forums.whirlpool.net.au/archive/2165708)
- [FCCID page showing photos and other documents for the device](https://fccid.io/2AALMPVU-G2NA)
    - At one point, the monitor's model was "PVU-G2NA PowerVu".
- [User manual](https://www.manualslib.com/manual/713959/Origin-Energy-Monitor.html)


## Installation and setup
1. Clone this repository to the computer that the monitor will be connected to.
2. Create a python virtual environment and activate it.
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    ```
3. Install the required libraries
    ```bash
    pip3 install -r requirements.txt
    ```
4. Log into your ThingsBoard server and create a new device. Note down the MQTT
    access token for it.
5. Make a copy of [`settings.example.py`](./settings.example.py) and name it 
    `settings.py`. Fill in the required constants for file paths, UUIDs, address
    of your ThingsBoard server and access token.
6. If you plan to make the computer remove power from its USB ports between readings to reduce damage from overcharging the battery in the monitor, set `REMOVE_POWER_BETWEEN_RUNS` to be `True`.
    - Udev rules can be added based on the [uhubctl](https://github.com/mvp/uhubctl/tree/master) readme to give permission for non-root users to perform these actions.
    - The included [`52-usb-hub-power.rules`](./52-usb-hub-power.rules) file is set up for a Raspberry Pi 3B. Modify as needed and copy this to `/etc/udev/rules.d/52-usb-hub-power.rules`. Refresh and apply these rules by rebooting or running:
        ```bash
        sudo udevadm trigger --attr-match=subsystem=usb
        ```
    - The user that will run this script may need to be added to the `dialout` group:
        ```bash
        sudo usermod -a -G dialout $USER
        ```
    - Test by running the examples from the [uhubctl](https://github.com/mvp/uhubctl/tree/master) readme with and without root permissions.
6. Check that everything is working correctly by manually running
    [`read_data.py`](./read_data.py).
    ```bash
    ./read_data.py
    ```
7. Set up a cron job to regularly run the script to fetch new data from the
    energy monitor and publish it. This can be accomplished using `crontab -e`.  
    The following example acquires and uploaded fresh data at 3 minutes past the
    half hour to allow for some discrepancy between the energy monitor's clock
    and the computer's.
    ```cron
    3-59/30 * * * * cd <FOLDER_OF_THIS_SCRIPT> && ./.venv/bin/python3 read_data.py
    ```
